docs: documentation for generator resource expansion feature (#2229)
open-policy-agent/gatekeeper: website/docs/expansion.md

---
id: expansion

> title: Early Rejection of Generator Resources

Reviewer: Since this works with `dryrun` or `warn` too, do we want to call this rejection?

Reviewer 2: I think you had mentioned "Early Validation of Generator Resources"

Reviewer 2: PSA called it `workload object` and `workload resources`
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/#workload-resources-and-pod-templates
How about `Early Validation of Workload Resources`

Reviewer: or just `Validation of Workload resources`?

Reviewer 2: wdyt @davis-haba @maxsmythe

Reviewer 3: SGTM, the concept is more general that just "workload", but I suspect that'll be the most common touch point.

---

> > 🚧 This feature is in _alpha_ stage, and is not enabled by default. To

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ❗This feature is in _alpha_ stage, and is not enabled by default. To
```
Can you also add the `Feature State` like https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/pull/2260/files#diff-953d3a7e7497c49d0d940dec88438549eb9fff09afa48eb261123ab3773a9290R6-R8

Reviewer 2: nit. can you update to ❗so it's consistent with other features still in alpha stage?

> enable, set the "enable-generator-resource-expansion" flag.

> Gatekeeper can be configured to reject generator resources that might create a

Reviewer 3: We should start with a definition and example of "generator resources", I don't think it's a common term.

resource that violates a policy. For example, one could configure Gatekeeper to
immediately reject deployments that would create a `Pod` that violates a
constraint instead of merely rejecting the Pods. To achieve this, Gatekeeper
creates a "mock resource" for the `Pod`, runs validation on it, and aggregates
the mock resource's violations onto the parent resource (the `Deployment` in
this example).

To use this functionality, first specify which resources should be "expanded" by
creating 1 or more `TemplateExpansion` custom resources. Then, in order for
Gatekeeper to accurately create these "mock resources" in a way that mirrors the
real Kubernetes controllers, users can define any number of

> [Mutations](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/mutation)

Reviewer 2: maybe mention something about for this expansion generator feature, we are leveraging Gatekeeper's mutation feature to create the mock resources.

    versions: ["v1"]
  location: "spec.containers[name: *].fooField"
  parameters:
    assign:
      value: "Bar"
  match:
    source: "Generated"
    scope: Cluster
    kinds:
      - apiGroups: []
        kinds: []
```

Similarly, `Constraints` can be configured to only target expanded resources by
setting the `Constraint`'s `spec.match.source` field to `Generated`. This can
also be used to define different enforcement actions for expanded resources and
original resources.

## Example

What follows is an example of:

- an  `ExpansionTemplate` configured to expand `Deployments` into `Pods`
- an `Assign` mutator to set the `imagePullPolicy` on expanded `Pods`
- an inbound `Deployment`, and the resulting `Pod`

```
apiVersion: expansion.gatekeeper.sh/v1alpha1
kind: ExpansionTemplate
metadata:
  name: expand-deployments
spec:
  applyTo:
  - groups: [ "apps" ]
    kinds: [ "Deployment" ]
    versions: [ "v1" ]
  templateSource: "spec.template"
  generatedGVK:
    kind: "Pod"
    group: ""
    version: "v1"
—--
apiVersion: mutations.gatekeeper.sh/v1alpha1
kind: Assign
metadata:
  name: always-pull-image
spec:
  applyTo:
  - groups: [ "" ]
    kinds: [ "Pod" ]
    versions: [ "v1" ]

>   location: "spec.containers[name: *].imagePullPolicy"

Reviewer 2: This example isnt working for me. Can you give it a try?

webhook and
[Audit](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/audit). This
feature will only be enabled if a user creates a `ExpansionTemplate` that
targets some resource that exists on the cluster.

Note that the accuracy of enforcement depends on how well the mock resource
resembles the real thing. Mutations can help with this, but 100% accuracy is
impossible because not all fields can be predicted. For instance, deployments
create pods with random names. Inaccurate mocks may lead to over or under
enforcement. In the case of under enforcement, the resultant pod should still be
rejected. Finally, non-state-based policies (those that rely on transient
metadata such as requesting user or time of creation) cannot be enforced
accurately. This is because such metadata would necessarily be different when
creating the resultant resource. For example, a deployment is created using the
requesting user's account, but the pod creation request comes from the service
account of the deployment controller.

If, for any reason, you want to exempt expanded resources from a specific
constraint, look at the [Match Source](#match-source) section below.

## Configuring Expansion

> Expansion behavior is configured through the `ExpansionTemplate` CR. Optionally,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Expansion behavior is configured through the `ExpansionTemplate` customer resource. Optionally,
```

users can create `Mutation` CRs to customize how resources are expanded.
Mutators with the `source: Generated` field will only be applied when expanding

> workload resources, and will not mutate real resources on the cluster.

Reviewer 2: Might be good to mention what is the default `source` if not provided and how it applies to both generated and original.

Users can test their expansion configuration using the
[`gator expand` CLI](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/gator)
.

#### ExpansionTemplate

> The `ExpansionTemplate` CR specifies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ExpansionTemplate` custom resource specifies:
```

      versions: ["v1"]
  templateSource: "spec.template"
  generatedGVK:
    kind: "Pod"
    group: ""
    version: "v1"
```

With this `ExpansionTemplate`, any constraints that are configured to
target `Pods` will be evaluated on the "mock Pods" when a `Deployment`
/`ReplicaSet` is being reviewed.

#### Match Source

The `source` field on the `match` API, present in the Mutation
and `ConstraintTemplate` kinds, specifies if the config should match Generated (
i.e. expanded) resources, Original resources, or both. The `source` field is
an `enum` which accepts the following values:

- `Generated` – the config will only apply to expanded resources, **and will not
  apply to any real resources on the cluster**
- `Original` – the config will only apply to Original resources, and will not
  affect expanded resources
- `All` – the config will apply to both `Generated` and `Original` resources.
  This is the default value.

For example, suppose a cluster's `ReplicaSet` controller adds a default value
for `fooField` when creating Pods that cannot reasonably be added to
the `ReplicaSet`'s `spec.template`. If a constraint relies on these default

> values, a user could create a Mutation CR that modifies expanded resources, like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
values, a user could create a Mutation custom resource that modifies expanded resources, like
```
